Foo Fighters is an American alternative rock band formed in Seattle in 1994 by former Nirvana drummer Dave Grohl.

The group takes its name from the UFOs and various aerial phenomena reported by Allied aircraft pilots during World War II, collectively known as Foo Fighters. Before the release of their debut album in 1995, Grohl, as the sole official member, recruited bassist Nate Mendel and drummer William Goldsmith, both formerly of Sunny Day Real Estate, as well as his Nirvana touring partner Pat Smear as guitarist to complete the lineup.

The band began performing in Portland, Oregon. Goldsmith quit during the recording of the group's second album, The Colour and the Shape (1997), when most of the drum parts were re-recorded by Grohl himself, until Taylor Hawkins joined as drummer. Smear's departure followed shortly after.

He was replaced by Franz Stahl, though he was fired before the recording of the group's third album, There Is Nothing Left to Lose (1999). The band continued briefly as a trio until Chris Shiflett joined as the band's lead guitarist after the completion of There Is Nothing Left to Lose. The band released their fourth album, One by One, in 2002. The group followed that with the two-disc release In Your Honor (2005), which is split between acoustic songs and heavier material. Pat Smear returned to the band that same year, and keyboardist Rami Jaffee joined.

Foo Fighters have sold over 15 million records worldwide. Foo Fighters released their sixth album, Echoes, Silence, Patience & Grace, in 2007. In 2010, it was confirmed that Smear had officially rejoined the band after touring with Foo Fighters as an unofficial member between 2006 and 2009. Over the course of the band's career, four of their albums have won the Grammy Award for Best Rock Album. The band's seventh studio album, Wasting Light, produced by Butch Vig (renowned producer of Nirvana), was released in 2011 and their eighth album, Sonic Highways, their second recorded with Butch Vig, was released in November 2014. Their ninth album, Concrete and Gold, produced by Greg Kurstin and released worldwide on September 15, 2017, through RCA Records. The album features a fusion of hard rock and pop musical genres. Concrete and Gold addresses the future of America from the perspective of band leader and primary songwriter Dave Grohl, with the context of the 2016 election and Donald Trump's presidency cited as major influences by Grohl. Juxtapositions are a common motif in the album's lyrical and musical composition, with Grohl describing the album's overall theme as "hope and despair." This album marked Rami Jaffee's first appearance as an official member. Their tenth studio album, Medicine at Midnight, was the last to feature Taylor Hawkins before his death.

On May 21, 2023, just over a year after Taylor's passing, the band performed a free streaming concert, confirming the addition of Josh Freese as their new drummer; their eleventh studio album, But Here We Are, was released shortly after.

In August 2024, the band announced they would donate all profits from their single "My Hero" to Kamala Harris's presidential campaign, after opposing candidate Donald Trump used the song without permission at an event.

A month later, after Grohl announced he had become a father outside of marriage, Foo Fighters canceled their headlining performance at the Soundside Music Festival in Bridgeport, Connecticut.

Finally, on September 29, 2024, Foo Fighters announced they would be going on indefinite hiatus.

The story of Foo Fighters begins when Dave Grohl, a former member of Scream, was hired to drum for the then-little-known grunge band Nirvana. Kurt Cobain's talents made Grohl's first album with that band, Nevermind, a true mainstream success, propelling the band to the top of charts around the world. During his time as a member of Nirvana, Dave wrote several songs on his own, some of which he felt didn't quite fit the band's sound. Later, in 1997, he said, "I was in awe of Kurt Cobain's songs, and I was intimidated. So I thought it was best if I kept the songs to myself."[4] However, he did share some songs with his bandmates, such as "Marigold," which was even released as the B-side of In Utero, the band's third album, and of which there are several versions where Cobain sang backing vocals on one of them. With the rest of the songs, he decided to record a demo on his own under the pseudonym Late!, naming the album Pocketwatch.[5] The demo was released on just one hundred cassettes, which Grohl distributed solely among his friends and with no intention of releasing it commercially.

After Kurt Cobain's death and the subsequent demise of Nirvana, Grohl decided to move forward with his musical career. He returned to the studio to record a few more songs on his own, this time under the pseudonym Foo Fighters. He recorded all the instruments on all the songs himself, except for a backing guitar provided by his friend Greg Dulli (guitarist for the Afghan Whigs).[6] As with the previous album, he released this recording on cassette and distributed it among his friends. However, this time it received very good reviews, and one of the songs, "This is a Call," even began receiving radio play in Los Angeles. He decided to formalize what until then had been just a project, recruiting other musicians to officially form a band, and also creating his own record label: Roswell Records, a subsidiary of Capitol Records.[7]

This was how the Foo Fighters were born, whose name comes from the name Allied pilots gave to unidentified flying objects (UFOs) during World War II. In 2009, Dave Grohl told VH1 Storytellers that the name "Foo Fighters" was intended to be catchy, like "Led Zeppelin," but that he wouldn't have named the band "Foo Fighters" if he had known it would be so successful.

The Colour and the Shape (1997-1999)
Following the band's huge success, they toured for several months, performing throughout the United States and some European cities, with their success in England being particularly notable. After nearly two years of extensive touring, they began recording their second album, The Colour and the Shape, in 1997. It contains hits such as "Monkey Wrench," "My Hero," and "Hey, Johnny Park!" and "Everlong", "Walking after you" which was also included in the soundtrack of "X Files". For the recording of the album, William Goldsmith (drums) was only required on "Doll" and "Up in Arms", which led to his departure from the group after several arguments. Other sources cite clashes between producer Gil Norton and Goldsmith which caused the latter's departure, leaving Grohl in this position to record the rest of the songs. [6] Critics proclaimed it as one of the best rock albums of the 90s. Looking for a replacement to fill the drumming position in the group on tour, Grohl called Taylor Hawkins (former member of Hot Chocolate, Alanis Morissette's live band) to ask if he knew anyone who could fill Goldsmith's place, but, to Grohl's surprise, Hawkins offered to take the drumming duties, and so he recorded the last songs on the album. Following the release, Pat Smear (guitarist) also decided to leave the band due to the exhaustion of this new tour, so Dave hired Franz Stahl (Grohl's former bandmate in the band Scream) on guitars, who was fired before the recording of the next album due to "creative differences."
There Is Nothing Left to Lose (1999-2001)
After finishing the tour for “The Colour and the Shape” in August 1998, Grohl decided to take a break and return to his hometown of Virginia. After a couple of months there, he converted his basement into a recording studio where they began working on what would become his third album, There Is Nothing Left to Lose. This album would feature a much more melodic tone than its predecessors. The album featured songs such as "Breakout" (which would be included on the soundtrack to the film Me, Myself & Irene), "Next Year" (the soundtrack to the television series Ed), "Generator," "Stacked Actors," and "Learn to Fly" (number 1 on the Billboard charts).[6]

After Stahl's departure, the band tried out a number of guitarists, eventually landing on Chris Shiflett, formerly of No Use for a Name and Me First and the Gimme Gimmes. However, the band was already finishing recording the album, which is why he doesn't appear in the album's credits.

That same year, Foo Fighters contacted Queen. Brian May collaborated on Foo Fighters' second cover of Pink Floyd's "Have a Cigar," which appeared on the Mission: Impossible II soundtrack. [7]

When Queen was inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in March 2001, Grohl and Hawkins were invited to perform "Tie Your Mother Down" with the legendary band. [7] Foo Fighters performed with them on other occasions, including the VH1 Rock Honors and their concert at London's Hyde Park.

In 2000, the band publicly acknowledged their support for Alive & Well, [8] an American organization that does not believe that the human immunodeficiency virus is the cause of AIDS, questions the validity of tests for the virus, and denies the use of drugs to treat the disease. Bassist Nate Mendel was the one who recommended the book by the organization's founder, Christine Maggiore, to the rest of the band members.

That same year, Mendel organized a benefit concert for the organization,[8] as well as contributing to the documentary promoted by the society called The Other Side of AIDS.[9]

One by One (2002–2004)
At the end of 2001, and now with their new guitarist, the band returned to Virginia to work on a new album, which did not meet Grohl's expectations, which is why he decided to abandon the recording sessions and take a break. During this time, he recorded drums on Queens of the Stone Age's album Songs for the Deaf,[6] also touring with them in 2002. Shiflett also worked on his own project during this time, a punk band called Jackson (now Jackson United). Having regained strength, the band returned to the studio to re-record, in just two weeks, the album they had prepared before their time in Queens of the Stone Age, titled One by One. This recording features songs such as "All My Life," "Low," "Overdrive," "Comeback," "Have it All," and "Times Like These." The video for "Low" was heavily criticized and censored on many radio stations around the world, as it featured Grohl, along with his friend Jack Black, visibly drunk and posing in obscene positions. This album helped them definitively establish themselves as one of the most important and current alternative rock acts of our time, and they toured the world once again.

The band usually steers clear of political issues, but in 2004, Grohl decided to support US presidential candidate John Kerry. Following this incident, the entire band joined Grohl's campaign and performed concerts for his campaign. Then, his opponent, George W. Bush, used two of their songs, "Times like These" and "My Hero", for his campaigns, declaring himself a fan of the band, something that Dave Grohl did not like at all. [7] This event was what inspired the title of his next album, In Your Honor. [7]